# Generating Passwords

A quick disclaimer. The idea of storing passwords on your computer is probably not the best practice from a security standpoint. This app is meant as a fun exploration of React and state management with local storage. This project is not meant to be a commercial product. 

That said all of the ideas here can and are used in commercial products every day by millions of people. 

## What makes a good password?

Your first step will be to create some code that generates a random password. 

As long as we are generating passwords we might as well ask the question: what makes a good password? 

Generally speaking, the strength of a password is related to the number of possible guesses it would take to solve it. 

If you used only numbers and made a password that was 1 character long there would be 10 possible choices. 

If you increased the number of characters to 2 you'd have 100 possible choices. 

Expanding this to include letters, upper and lower case, and punctuation you'd have a character set of ~95 characters. Generating a password with a length of 8 characters would give you trillions of possibilities. 

In practice the question is more complex, passwords are generated by people and people tend to use *patterns* when they generate their passwords. Matching patterns is easier than guessing each character! See the links in the resources for more information if you are interested in password security. 

## Make a component to display a password

The first step will be to create a component that displays a password. 
Then follow up with some code that generates a random password. 

Create a new file 'src/password.js'. 

Define a new React component in this file. 

```JavaScript
import { useState } from 'react'

function generatePassword() {
  // generate a password here
  console.log("generating password")
}

function Password() {
  const [password, setPassword] = useState('p@$$w0rd')

  return (
  <div>
    <div>{password}</div>
    <div>
      <button onClick={(e) => {
        generatePassword()
      }}>Generate</button>
    </div>
  </div>
  )
}

export default Password
```

Import this into 'App.js'. Modify 'App.js' to look like this: 

```JavaScript
import Password from './Password';
import './App.css';

function App() {
  return (
    <div className="App">
      <Password />
    </div>
  );
}

export default App;
```

With this in place, you should see "p@ssw0rd" appear in the browser.

Clicking the button should print: "generating password" to the console. 

`p@ssw0rd` is a terrible password! Any hacker could guess this in a few seconds! You need to generate a better password. 

## JavaScript Numbers 

Take a look at these live code samples and answer the questions there then read the sections below. 

### Math.random()

To generate a random password we need to generate some random values. JavaScript
provides the `Math.random()` method for this. 

The `Math.random()` method returns a random number between 0 and 1. Something like: 

- 0.702511437296816
- 0.9711624112470257
- 0.9030843509554727

Read the documentation: [MDN - Math.random()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/random) says: 

> The `Math.random()` function returns a floating-point pseudo-random number in the range from 0 inclusive up to but not including 1 — which you can then scale to your desired range. The implementation selects the initial seed to the random number generation algorithm; it cannot be chosen or reset by the user.

Let's take this apart. 

**Floating-point** is a decimal number like: 173.9 or 0.30000000000000004.

**...from 0 inclusive up to but not including 1...** says the possible values could range from
0.0 to 0.999999999999 

**...which you can then scale...** To get a usable range of values you will need to multiply by a range. For example `Math.random() * 6` would generate numbers from 0.0 to 5.999

Often you will want a whole number like 1, 2, or 3. Since `Math.random()` generates a floating point number you will need to use some of the other `Math` functions to convert the floating point values into Integers. `Math.round()`, `Math.floor()`, `Math.ceil()` among others can do that. 

`Math.random()` generates a **pseudo-random number**. This means that the numbers generated are not entirely random. They are random enough but over long observation, you might be able to point out patterns. For our purposes, the numbers will be random enough.

### Generating random integers in a range

For this project, you will want to generate random integers in a range. For example, if you have an array you might want to get a random element from that array. The index of any element in an array is always an integer starting at 0 up to the length of the array - 1. 

Here is a function that generates a random number between `n` and `n - 1`.

```JavaScript
function random(n) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * n)
}
```

`Math.floor(n)` rounds the value `n` down to a whole number. Here is what MDN says: 

> The `Math.floor()` function returns the largest integer less than or equal to a given number.

Here are a few useful examples of the function above. 

Generate a random die roll: `random(6) + 1; // generates a number be 1 and 6`

Get a random element from an array: 

```JavaScript
const names = ['Ann', 'Bob', 'Cat', 'Dan'];
names[random(names.length)] // returns a random name e.g. 'Bob'
```

Numbers are great but passwords need to use characters also to be more secure! 

### Generating a random character

To generate a random character there are several routes you can choose. Here are a couple of ideas. 

### Use an Array 

Create an array of all of the characters and choose a random element from the array. 

```JavaScript
const letters = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f', 'g'];
console.log(letters[random(letters.length)]);
```

The code snippet above would log a random letter from 'a' to 'g'. If you extended the array to add more characters then the range of possible letters would increase. 

### Strings are Array like

In JavaScript, Strings contains a sequence of characters. JavaScript treats Strings as "Array Like" objects. This means you can use many of the features of Arrays on Strings. 

For example, you can get the length of a String: `"abcd".length // 4`

You can access any character at an index: `"abcd"[2] // c`

```JavaScript
const str = 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz';
console.log(str[random(str.length)]); // prints a random lowercase letter
```

Similar to the first example, this example returns a random letter from the string 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'. You could add other letters and characters to this string for more possibilities.

### Use character code

Another way to generate characters is to use the character code. In short, each character is identified by a number. 

For example: 'a' is character code 97.

Many of the characters are not printable or usable in a password. 

Characters in the range of 33 to 126 include upper case, lower case, numbers, and punctuation. 

The code sample below should print all of the characters in the character code range 33 to 126. 

```JavaScript
for (let i = 33; i < 127; i ++) {
  console.log(i, String.fromCharCode(i))
}
```

`String.fromCharCode(i)` takes the integer `i` and returns the corresponding character for that number. 

**Challenge** Take the random number function above and use the character code to generate a random character. 

### Challenges 

Your challenge is to write a function that generates a string of 8 random characters. Use any of the ideas above, the method you choose is up to you. 

Your random password should display in the component when you press the "Generate" button. This will happen automatically by calling: 

`setPassWord(newPassword)`

Where `newPassword` is the randomly generated password. 

You can do everything here with vanilla JS and React and don't need any libraries. 

### More challenges

**Stretch Challnge 1**

Humans understand patterns. Putting the characters in the password into a pattern would make it easier to remember. Modify the generator to output the password in this 
form: 

`xxx-xxx-xxx`

Where each x is a random character. For example: 

`6N1-kMH-d?i`
`8Gu'-PKe-0Tt`
`rR7-J1U-6zZ`

**Stretch Challnge 2**

Make a password generator that generates a password made from words. This might make stronger more memorable passwords. 

Generate a password made up of 4 to 8 words. For example: 

- the orange truest flange
- apple car from space language
- monkey under french dance weather kick

- https://blogs.dropbox.com/tech/2012/04/zxcvbn-realistic-password-strength-estimation/

## Resources 

- [Math](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math)
  - [Math.random()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/random)
  - [Math.floor()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/floor)
  - [Math.ceil()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/ceil)
  - [Math.round()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/round)
- [Strings](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String)
  - [String.fromCharCode()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/fromCharCode)
  - [String.length](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/length)
  - [String.charAt()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/charAt)
- Advanced topics 
  - [Array Like Objects](http://www.nfriedly.com/techblog/2009/06/advanced-javascript-objects-arrays-and-array-like-objects/)

Next: [Controlled Components](../P04-Controlled-Components)
Previous: [Create React App](../P02-Create-React-App)
